Testing, testing, one, two, three, four, testing, testing, testing.
Testing, ABC, ABC, testing, testing.
Testing, testing on Wednesday, May 1, I believe it is.
Yeah, yeah.
This is May the 1st.
and I have the honor and pleasure of interviewing Dr. John McIntyre, professor of physics, about his years here.
To introduce yourself to anyone who might hear the tape or read the transcription, give us a brief biographical summary of growing up and high school and college and experience before coming to A&M.
Well, I grew up in Seattle, Washington,
My father was a professor at the University of Washington in mechanical engineering, so naturally I was an engineer.
But mechanical engineering was too much about burning coal and, I don't know, kind of grubby stuff, things you just had to memorize.
So I switched to electrical engineering, which has much more theory to it than mechanical.
and got my degree in electrical engineering, and then went to work during the war at Westinghouse.
Was this at the University of Washington, where you get a drone?
Yeah, I got my degree at the University of Washington.
Go ahead.
And during the war, I worked at Westinghouse, where we developed radar.
We were building a radar to pick up airplanes that would attack from behind, tail gunner radar, that was it.
And it wasn't very sophisticated.
It didn't give any pictures.
When the airplane came within a certain distance, a red light went on, and the tail gunner had to wake up and see what was happening.
And then the war ended with the atomic bomb, and we were all thrown out of work, and we're going to be sent off to Japan to occupy Japan.
But fortunately for the engineers, the Congress
made it possible to go to graduate school and not get drafted.
So I had planned to go to MIT being an engineer, but I had to get a job before I could get into graduate school.
And somebody where I worked had come from Princeton, and he knew they were doing some research there on government contracts.
So I got a job at Princeton.
and I found out I was in one of the best physics departments in the country.
I'd always thought of Princeton as tigers and hip flasks but turns out they had a good physics department.
And on top of that Einstein lived in town and that made it more interesting.
So I entered graduate school at Princeton and got my degree in physics at Princeton.
Part of the reason was that I wondered what this
what Truman called the atomic bomb, was really a nuclear bomb, how it worked, and nobody knew.
And so I, just out of curiosity, I decided to take physics and did a research, my research in nuclear physics.
Well then, my professor, Robert Hofstadter, was a very, I don't know,
accessible person.
The reason I did research with him was he was really the only professor at Princeton I could understand and he taught a course in optics which was a dead subject then.
There were no lasers and so optics was a, nobody who was doing any research would do it in optics but Hofstadter taught the course in optics and they thought it was important that all physicists should know optics and
So I did research with him.
I was his only graduate student.
And he made such a small impression at Princeton, he didn't get promoted.
So he had to get a job.
And at the time, jobs were pretty plentiful.
He had an offer from Berkeley and one from Stanford.
And Berkeley was the powerhouse.
They had the big cyclotrons.
And Stanford had built a new electron accelerator
And they were having difficulty getting people to come and work on it because everybody knew electrons had nothing to do with nuclei.
But it turned out in the end the reason electrons were so useful for nuclear physics is that they didn't knock the nucleus all apart.
And you really knew what the nucleus was like.
So Hostetter went to Stanford and I worked with him on his research and he won the Nobel Prize in 1961.
Let's see, we went there in 1950.
Now this is the same man that didn't get promoted at Princeton.
Yeah.
And he won a Nobel Prize before any of the professors at Princeton won a Nobel Prize.
And he was just a very intelligent person, but he
He was so straightforward and easy to understand that nobody was impressed by how smart he was.
So, and he was a very nice man to work with.
I was there at seven years at Stanford.
And so then I went to Yale for six years working on a different kind of an accelerator.
It was still nuclear physics.
And then Texas A&M decided to build a cyclotron.
And that is a very interesting story because
There wasn't a single physicist at Texas A&M who knew anything about nuclear physics.
They had a reactor, but that was in the nuclear engineering department.
Share with this machine as much of how that came about as you know.
All right.
Well, the reason I got hired is they had to hire some nuclear physicists in order to get a cyclotron.
And this is one of the places where Rudder really showed his abilities.
He talked to the right people.
He talked to the people of the National Academy of Sciences.
And in particular, he talked to Glenn Seaborg, who was the head of the Atomic Energy Commission at the time.
And Glenn Seaborg was also head of the Welsh Foundation, which was funded by a Texas oil man.
who left as much money to the Welch Foundation for chemistry as the National Science Foundation had for the whole country in chemistry.
And so Texas has powerhouse chemistry departments because all of this Welch money has to be spent in chemistry.
Well, Glenn Seaborg was a nuclear chemist, although it's very difficult to distinguish a nuclear chemist from a nuclear physicist.
And he was in the head of the Welsh Foundation.
So the Welsh Foundation wanted to give money to the universities in Texas to do nuclear chemistry and that meant accelerators.
Well, Rice had the most advanced nuclear physics department and it was always the physics departments that built the accelerators.
And they had the most advanced department.
They had a Van de Graaff, which was a cutting edge instrument.
And Seaborg kind of wanted a cyclotron, which had a lot more intensity and power than the Van de Graaff.
The Van de Graaff was for precision work in nuclear physics.
The cyclotron blasted things and made a lot of radioactive chemicals.
So Rice was not interested in a cyclotron.
So then the Welsh Foundation turned to the University of Texas, and they had a small Van de Graaff, and they were coming along in chemical, in nuclear physics.
But they had enough experienced people to know they didn't want to get in the business of building a cyclotron.
In fact, you could buy a Van de Graaff at that time, a very good one, for about $2 million.
And so I'm sure that the state legislature gave $2 million to Texas, I'm sure, for that Van de Graaff.
And because there's a lot of Aggies in the legislature, they had to give $2 million to Texas A&M.
Well, Texas A&M didn't have anything.
They didn't have a nuclear physicist.
And that's how I got hired.
They had to hire some nuclear physicists.
They hired a man from Berkeley who had worked on a cyclotron that Seaborg wanted to build, was built at Berkeley, and he was the director of the cyclotron.
Who was he?
He was George Igo, I-G-O.
But they couldn't just have one man write a proposal, so they hired me and another professor, theoretical professor, John Gamal, and the three of us had our names on the proposal.
As far as you know, who was the key person here working on all of the details?
Yeah, he should be mentioned.
Charles Squire was the man who organized it all and pulled it together.
Actually, I met him in the New Haven Airports.
He came up there to see me.
Did he kind of interview you?
Yeah, and then I already accepted a job
It was one of those, back then, jobs were easy to get.
But I had promised him I'd visit A&M.
And so I visited.
And A&M was so much more organized and hospitable than these other physics departments with physicists in charge of hospitality or kind of hopeless.
And A&M, well, Squire had a
a little car and everything.
I meet people at certain times and well I just was impressed by the organization.
Another thing that impressed me, I had an offer to go to Stony Brook which Governor Rockefeller had decided that New York State had no really good public universities and Stony Brook was going to be the crown jewel of the New York system and that what made it attractive
But every time I talked to the head of the department before he could answer my question, he had to call Albany.
Well, when I came to A&M, I walked into Earl Rudder's office and all the questions were answered right then and there.
Describe your conversation with Mr. Rudder, that early conversation.
Well, one of the things I was concerned about was I was coming to someplace out in the middle of the prairie with no technology.
No machine shops, no electronic shops, nothing.
And I was a nuclear physicist doing research and publishing papers.
And the thing that really helped me to make the decision was that Texas A&M was one of the members of the Oak Ridge Institute.
I don't know the name exactly.
But Rudder arranged for me to
get time on the Van de Graaff Accelerator at Oak Ridge for several years.
And they arranged for one of the graduate students who was leaving Yale to go to Oak Ridge.
And he came here eventually to work on our cyclotron.
So that kind of made the transition much easier.
Otherwise A&M had nothing out here.
except to Hayfield.
Now, Mr. Rudder was not a scholar himself, but in his conversations with you, did he seem well informed about this very serious matter?
Yes, he had a good understanding of what made research people and academic people what was important to us.
And I don't know how he got it, but he had it.
And I think it was because he talked to the right people, Glenn Seaborg and, well, I should also mention, I forgot Hall's first name.
Wayne Hall.
Wayne Hall, yeah.
I think he was a very positive factor.
Vice President for Academic Affairs.
Right, yeah.
And this, these campus visits would have been in 62 or 63?
Yeah, the spring of 63.
63.
I came in September, or summer of 63.
All right, this is the only dollar question I'm going to ask you.
What was your beginning salary?
Well, let me tell you what my salary was at Yale first.
It was $11,000 a year, and I got $17,000 coming here.
And by the standards of the nation, that was a competitive salary?
Yeah, A&M was competitive.
Yeah, it was competitive to Stony Brook.
What kind of... And this is what Squire did, I think.
He knew what was going on.
What kind of commitments, promises did A&M make to support you and this project, as you understand?
Well, the way I looked at it at the time... Well, let me... They had the $2 million.
Mm-hmm.
And because they were going to build a cyclotron, the Welch Foundation gave them another million dollars.
So the proposal we were writing was to the Atomic Energy Commission for three million dollars to match the three million we had.
So this was a six million dollar project and the Texas was two million dollar project with the same amount of money essentially to start with.
And Rudder had pyramided the thing into a much bigger project.
And so
When we got the money, we got this $3 million from the Atomic Energy Commission.
But to let you know what it was like at the time, we were competing.
There were 23 universities after that $3 million.
And they were not peanuts.
I mean, there was Princeton.
There was Maryland.
There was Indiana.
There was, I mean, the big guys.
They were after that.
I mean, $3 million was $3 million.
And when A&M got it,
Why they said it's like giving a Cadillac to a peasant because we, you know, we had nothing.
And I hadn't built an accelerator myself.
I didn't know how to build an accelerator.
But the way I looked at it, knowing my feeling was, well, if A&M has $3 million, they can do something with $3 million.
They've got that in hand whether they get the other $3 million or not.
So I took a gamble.
But let me just recall one thing that was important in my thinking about it.
We went out to lunch at Stony Brook.
And Stony Brook had been a teacher's college.
And they had the crummiest looking bunch of students you ever saw.
There was trash all over the place.
And at A&M was a little spick and span at the Memorial Student Center.
And in those days they had tablecloths and napkins and everything.
So it just seemed like a much... Well, I put it to myself.
I'm going to wake up in the morning every day.
Do I want to go here or do I want to go there?
And so it was a gut feeling, really.
But I've never regretted it.
I mean, I got in on something very good, I think.
Right.
When you moved down here, describe family that you brought with you.
Well, I had a wife and a boy, a boy 12 years old.
Okay.
And my wife...
bless her soul, said, you make your decision.
I'm not going to bother to go down there.
But when we got here in August, driving through North Bryan was a shock.
And then we got our air conditioned house, which turned out was window air conditioners that didn't work.
So she was all ready to go back to Connecticut.
But we headed for Seattle for two weeks.
And every year, for two weeks, we leave Texas in the summer.
That was part of the deal.
And when you found a place to live, where did you find?
Well, I was a professor of civil engineering, was on leave for a year.
So it was on Brookside.
It was an old house, but near the university.
And he'd put some air conditioners in the window.
Were you aware at that point of the study underway about what A&M's future ought to be?
Were you aware that there was any thought being given to coeducation and non-compulsory core and all that?
No, I think I learned most of that when I got here.
I mean, when you're a research physicist, you don't worry too much about those things.
I mean, I'd done research at Oak Ridge and Stanford and what was going on in the rest of the community.
I wasn't at the stage where I was thinking about retirement or anything.
I wanted to see what facilities have we got so I can do some research and publish some papers.
When you went to work, what laboratory office, what
What facilities were you provided?
Well, I got, I was given an office in a physics building, and I started to do some, well, and I brought some equipment down from Yale, and they gave me some money.
Dean Hubert raised some money for me to,
by lead bricks.
You don't move lead bricks from Yale.
And so I set up an experiment here in the basement of the physics department.
So they gave me a nice big laboratory.
They were very accommodating and really essentially everything I needed.
Who was the department head then?
Oh, um, Potter.
What's his name?
Jim Potter.
And I could tell there was a problem there.
I wasn't introduced to Potter until I was almost ready to take the plane home.
And obviously he and Squire did.
Well Squire thought Potter was incompetent, and Potter was a very decent guy, but he'd been here for thirty years.
They did no research here.
And so he did teaching, and to Squire, teaching was a second-rate occupation.
Now, the physics department at that time offered, on paper at least, offered both masters and PhDs.
Yeah, that was one of the good things.
You could get graduate students to help with your research, yeah.
But before you came here, what physicist at Texas A&M had you ever heard of?
Well, I'd never heard of any because they didn't have anybody in nuclear physics, but I did find there were some people here who were publishing the main one I recall as Mel Eisner, who, and maybe this is the point to mention that in the first five years I was here, six full professors left Texas A&M.
There was no tenure, there was no need for tenure, because they were so busy trying to hire people that
The whole idea that anybody would want to stay was not a problem.
So it was, well, there was a transition period.
How were you and your wife received by the department?
Were there any social events in the department or for the department's members?
Oh, yes, yeah.
Yeah, they were good.
Potter was very
He'd go out, when we got a new graduate student, he'd go out and help him unpack his truck and move him in.
I mean, he was just a very, very nice man.
Did you have any teaching assignments?
Yeah, yeah.
I had, yeah, I taught a nuclear physics course, and there wasn't any nuclear physicists here.
Well, at the end, when we got a lot of nuclear physicists, I ended up teaching the engineers, because a lot of physicists don't understand engineers, and since I was an engineer, I knew where they were coming from.
These courses were at what level?
A graduate or senior?
Well, yeah.
The nuclear physics was a graduate course, and then I taught optics for quite a while.
That was a senior course.
share some experiences for you and possibly a family of learning about Texas A&M and the community.
Well, I can tell you one interesting interchange I had.
Some people said, how did it come about?
He said,
Oh, where do you work?
And I said, I work at the university.
And they said, oh, you're visiting here from Austin.
That's because the name officially then was A&M College.
And it changed just that year.
And I was innocent.
I thought it had always been Texas A&M University.
So things like that made me realize a little bit about the past history.
But one thing A&M should be proud of, they have a tremendous tradition of teaching.
And because they hadn't been doing research, they had a lot of good teachers, and they have a lot more interest in students than the average research university.
There was a very good girl I had in engineering, and so she went to Stanford.
And she said, for her master's degree, and she said the teaching at A&M is infinitely superior to Stanford.
The professors aren't there half the time.
They're off, you know, consulting and whatever.
So they had the tradition of teaching here, which I think is a very strong.
Did the students strike you as being pleasant, polite?
Yeah, very good.
And we use the same textbooks we use at Yale.
The way I look at it is,
The best A&M students are as good as the best at Yale.
There's a few really bright guys like this beautiful mind that you, he probably wouldn't have shown up at Texas A&M.
And Einstein wouldn't show up at Texas A&M.
It's too much gung ho.
For the average, I mean, for the good old American boy who's smart, and that's one reason I came here instead of Stony Brook.
You take the smart kids across the country or in New England, they're gonna go to Harvard or Yale or Princeton.
They're not gonna go to Stony Brook.
And I thought, well, here state of Texas is a big industrial state.
their smartest people are going to go to the MIT of Texas, which was Texas A&M.
And that was true.
We got good students.
All right.
When you arrived, how far along was the planning for the cyclotron?
They didn't even have the money.
Okay.
So the proposal was still being... I had to sign the proposal, yeah.
I mean, they had to get my name on the proposal.
Now,
Rudder kept, we kept saying, how's this coming on?
He says, don't worry.
I mean, the thing was settled before they hired me, probably.
But they had to have a proposal with some nuclear physicist's name on it in order to get the money.
Did Tiger Teague possibly help influence this?
I suppose.
I mean, Rudder didn't seem to be too concerned.
He knew Seaborg, and Tiger Teague was there, and they had the skids greased, I think.
But I didn't know about it, of course.
I wonder, did LBJ reckon he was a factor?
I don't know.
He was not mentioned.
I think LBJ was probably like Kennedy was with the Catholics.
I knew some Catholics, and when Kennedy was elected, Kennedy said to them, look, you cannot expect anything from me.
And LBJ probably had to say the same thing about Texas.
All right then when did the construction really begin?
Well we got the money in the spring of 64 and then the the first step was to decide how much it would cost well to design the building and and then they had to design the cyclotron and
Nobody here built a cyclotron and this is where again Rudder was so intelligent.
I mean he had been on the board of directors of some companies and one of them was Bechtel.
And Bechtel builds these big reactors out in Saudi Arabia.
Well in 1963 nuclear physics and nuclear energy was the big thing and Bechtel wanted to get in on it.
And so Rudder knew Steve Bechtel.
and they had this tremendous engineering staff in San Francisco and so they made a deal that that Steve Bechtel would build a cyclotron for three million dollars which he had to do because
The federal government said, we don't want any more cost overruns.
And Rudder said, don't worry, we'll bill it for $3 million.
A typical Army guy, you know, we'll do it, and then he worries about how to do it afterwards.
So he gets hold of Bechtel, and they said, OK, we'll do it for $3 million.
And there was a cyclotron at Berkeley that more or less we copied.
But they had to take all these, you know how universities are,
kind of crummy drawings and put them in engineering form, so there was a lot of work to be done.
And Bechtel did a good job, and they built the cyclotron, and there it is.
Who decided on the exact geographic location?
Do you know?
Why was it put there instead of somewhere else?
Well, I had a big fuss.
I wanted to put it in the middle of the campus.
I wanted to put it on the drill field.
I didn't know anything, you see.
So I wanted to put it next, well near the library, like a library.
Well that was shot down.
So it was put over there because it was near engineering.
I think that was the reason.
They didn't want to take a lot of value.
Well one thing Hubert talked to me about was using the animal
Science Center, that's a big building.
You know, it's kind of just a big open floor.
But we thought about it, but the cyclotron almost needs to be a special building with a lot of shielding and when you have to design the beam lines, I don't know whether you've been in the cyclotron, but it just doesn't fit into a square box.
So that was the best we could get with the Animal Center, so we ended up where we were.
Was Dean Benson a partner in this operation also?
I don't think he was involved because it wasn't in engineering.
It was, Hubert was the dean and Squire was associate dean of arts and science at the time.
And it took about how long to construct?
Well, let's see.
Seaboard came and gave the dedication address in 1967.
And the reason I remember that is it was the 25th anniversary of the first atomic pile in the stadium at the University of Chicago.
So four years after you arrived, it was... We had a running cyclotron, yeah.
Was there, were there any special experiences as you all began to... Well, this is where all the...
professors were coming and going, I go on to redesign the cyclotron, which was not very smart when nobody ever built a cyclotron.
And they had the AEC, it was their money, they were concerned.
So they had somebody from Oak Ridge overseeing or consulting or whatever and they put, in fact they sent a chief engineer here
from Oak Ridge to be the chief engineer.
And so I go left within a year, and Dr. Suttle was put in, director of the cyclotron.
Dr. Andrew Suttle, who was vice president for research.
Dr. Right.
Yeah.
And so then with Bechtel on the job, the cyclotron was going to get built, and
Let's see, I wasn't on the engineering side of it.
I don't know whether Bechtel supervised the building of it.
I think we probably supervised the building of it.
Bechtel provided the drawings, and then we sent out the bids.
I remember one very clever idea a man had, a tremendous amount of reinforced concrete all around the cyclotron, and it overlaps, it dovetails together,
which you have to have reasonable tolerances otherwise you're going to get a crack and radiation comes out.
So we got tremendously high bids to get that.